Source: zhang%20%281994%29%20representations%20in%20distributed%20cognitive%20tasks.pdf
================================================================================

Preprint: To appear in Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122, 1994.
Representations in Distributed Cognitive Tasks
Jiajie Zhang Donald A. Norman
The Ohio State University Apple Computer, Inc.
jiazhang@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu dnorman@apple.com
ABSTRACT People behave in an information rich
environment filled with natural and ar-
In this paper we propose a theoretical frame- tificial objects extended across space and
work of distributed representations and a time. A wide variety of cognitive tasks,
methodology of representational analysis for the
whether in everyday cognition, scien-
study of distributed cognitive tasksÑtasks that
tific practice, or professional life, require
require the processing of information distributed
the processing of information dis-
across the internal mind and the external envi-
ronment. The basic principle of distributed rep- tributed across the internal mind and
resentations is that the representational system the external environment. It is the in-
of a distributed cognitive task is a set of internal terwoven processing of internal and ex-
and external representations, which together
ternal information that generates much
represent the abstract structure of the task. The
of a person's intelligent behavior (e.g.,
basic strategy of representational analysis is to
Hutchins, 1990, in preparation;
decompose the representation of a hierarchical
task into its component levels so that the repre- Norman, 1988, 1991, in press).
sentational properties at each level can be inde- The traditional approach to cogni-
pendently examined. The theoretical framework tion, however, often assumes that rep-
and the methodology are used to analyze the hi-
resentations are exclusively in the mind
erarchical structure of the Tower of Hanoi prob-
(e.g., as propositions, schemas, produc-
lem. Based on this analysis, four experiments are
tions, mental images, connectionist
designed to examine the representational proper-
ties of the Tower of Hanoi. Finally, the nature of networks, etc.). External objects, if they
external representations is discussed. have anything to do with cognition at
all, are at most peripheral aids. For in-
This research was supported by a grant to Donald stance, written digits are usually consid-
Norman and Edwin Hutchins from the Ames Research
ered as mere memory aids for calcula-
Center of the National Aeronautics & Space Agency,
tion. Thus, because the traditional ap-
Grant NCC 2-591 in the Aviation Safety/Automation
Program, technical monitor, Everett Palmer. Additional proach lacks a means of accommodating
support was provided by funds from the Apple external representations in its own
Computer Company and the Digital Equipment
right, it sometimes has to postulate
Corporation to the Affiliates of Cognitive Science at
complex internal representations to ac-
UCSD.
We are very grateful to Ed Hutchins for many in- count for the complexity of behavior,
spiring discussions throughout this study. We would much of which, however, is merely a
also like to thank David Kirsh, Jean Mandler, Mark St.
reflection of the complexity of the envi-
John, Hank Strub, and Kazuhiro Takahashi for many
good comments during this study, James Greeno and ronment (e.g., Kirlik, 1989; Simon, 1981;
Daniel Reisberg for thoughtful comments and suggestions Suchman, 1987).
on an earlier version of the manuscript, and Sandra
This paper addresses the represen-
Hong, Lin Riley, and Richard Warren for their assis-
tational issues in distributed cognitive
tance in the experiments.
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be tasksÑtasks that require the processing
sent to Jiajie Zhang, Department of Psychology, The Ohio of information distributed across the in-
State University, 1885 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH
ternal mind and the external environ-
43210.
1
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
2
ment, focusing on three problems: (a) change from the geocentric representa-
the distributed representation of infor- tion of the solar system (Ptolemaic sys-
mation; (b) the interaction between in- tem) to the heliocentric representation
ternal and external representations; and (Copernican system) laid the founda-
(c) the nature of external representa- tion of modern science and fundamen-
tions. In the first part of this paper, we tally changed people's conception of the
begin with an introduction to the repre- universe.
sentational effect, then we propose a Psychological studies of the repre-
theoretical framework of distributed sentational effect in problem solving
representations and a methodology of and reasoning have focused on a few
representational analysis for the study well-structured problems, including
of distributed cognitive tasks. In the the Tower of Hanoi problem (e.g., Hayes
second part, we illustrate the principles & Simon, 1977; Kotovsky & Fallside,
of distributed representations and the 1989; Kotovsky, Hayes & Simon, 1985;
strategies of representational analysis Simon & Hayes, 1976), the Chinese Ring
through the analysis of the representa- puzzle (Kotovsky & Simon, 1990), the
tional structure of the Tower of Hanoi Hobbits-Orcs problem (e.g., Greeno,
problem. In the third part, we design 1974; Jeffries, Polson, & Razran, 1977;
four sets of Tower of Hanoi isomorphs Thomas, 1974), Wason's selection task
for empirical investigations. In the last (e.g., Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Evans,
part, we summarize our major claims 1983; Margolis, 1987; Wason, 1966;
and discuss the general properties of Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972), and
distributed cognitive tasks. Wason's THOG problem (e.g., Griggs &
Hewstead, 1982; O'Brien, Noveck,
PHENOMENON, THEORY, AND Davidson, Fisch, Lea, & Freitag, 1990;
METHODOLOGY Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1969). The ba-
sic finding is that different representa-
The Representational Effect tions of a problem can have dramatic
The representational effect refers to the impact on problem difficulty even if the
phenomenon that different isomorphic formal structures are the same. One
representations of a common formal characteristic of these problems is that
structure can cause dramatically differ- they all require the processing of both
ent cognitive behaviors. One obvious internal and external information.
example is the representation of num- However, most of these studies either
bers (for cognitive analyses, see exclusively focused on internal repre-
Nickerson, 1988; Norman, in press; sentations or, when taking external rep-
Zhang, 1992; Zhang & Norman, 1993). resentations into account, failed to sepa-
We are all aware that Arabic numerals rate them from internal representa-
are more efficient than Roman numer- tions.
als for multiplication (e.g., 73 ´ 27 is In this paper, we argue that inter-
´ nal and external representations are two
easier than LXXIII XXVII), even
indispensable parts of the representa-
though both types of numerals repre-
tional system of any distributed cogni-
sent the same entitiesÑnumbers. The
tive task. To study a distributed cogni-
most dramatic case is probably the
tive task, it is essential to decompose
Copernican revolution, where the
the representation of the task into its in-
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
3
ternal and external components so that For simple tasks, a representation and
the different functions of internal and its referent can be perceived by both
external representations can be identi- theorists and task performers. For ex-
fied. ample, both theorists and task perform-
ers know that written numerals,
Distributed Representations whether they are Arabic or Roman, are
The basic principle of distributed repre- the representations of abstract numbers.
sentations is that the representational For complex tasks, however, a represen-
system of a distributed cognitive task tation and its referent are usually only
can be considered as a set, with some meaningful from the point of view of
members internal and some external. theorists. To a task performer, a repre-
Internal representations are in the sentation does not represent anything:
mind, as propositions, productions, it is simply the medium (internal
schemas, mental images, connectionist and/or external) on which the task per-
networks, or other forms. External rep- former performs the task. For example,
resentations are in the world, as physi- for the Tower of Hanoi problem that we
cal symbols (e.g., written symbols, beads will consider later, the three problems
of abacuses, etc.) or as external rules, in Figure 12 all represent the same ab-
constraints, or relations embedded in stract structure (i.e., problem space, see
physical configurations (e.g., spatial re- Figure 3) to a theorist. To a task per-
lations of written digits, visual and spa- former, however, they are simply three
tial layouts of diagrams, physical con- different problems and they do not rep-
straints in abacuses, etc.). Generally, resent anything, though the task per-
there are one or more internal and ex- former might notice some regularities
ternal representations involved in any across these problems. Our notion of
distributed cognitive task. representation is essential for our pre-
Figure 1 shows the representa- sent studies of the representational
tional system of a task with two internal properties of distributed cognitive tasks.
and two external representations. Each By considering alternative representa-
internal representation resides in a per- tions of a common abstract structure,
son's mind, and each external represen- we can identify the factors that affect the
tation resides in an external medium. cognitive behavior in distributed cogni-
The internal representations form an tive tasks.
internal representational space, and the Our current approach to dis-
external representations form an exter- tributed cognitive tasks demands: (a)
nal representational space. These two the consideration of the internal and ex-
spaces together form a distributed repre- ternal representations of a distributed
sentational space, which is the represen- cognitive task as a representational sys-
tation of the abstract task space that de- tem; (b) the explicit decomposition of
scribes the abstract structures and prop- the representational system into its in-
erties of the task. ternal and external components; and (c)
We need to clarify our use of the the identification of the different func-
term "representation". In our present tions of internal and external represen-
study, the referent (the represented tations in cognition. The traditional
world) of a representation (the repre- approach to cognition is not appropriate
senting world) is an abstract structure. for the study of distributed cognitive
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
4
Distributed Representational Space
al n
al
n o
R e I p n r t e e s r e S n p t a a t c i e Internal 2 External 2 Repr S e E s p x e a t n e c t e r a n t a io l nal
Internal 1 External 1
Abstract Abstract Task Space
Figure 1. The theoretical framework of distributed representations. The internal representa-
tions form an internal representational space, and the external representations form an exter-
nal representational space. The internal and external representational spaces together form a
distributed representational space, which is the representation of the abstract task space.
tasks, because (a) it considers external Representational Analysis
representations as mere peripheral aids Representational analysis is a method-
to cognition, and (b) it often mixes ex- ology for the study of the representa-
ternal representations with internal tional effect in distributed cognitive
representations. Furthermore, the tra- tasks. It is based on hierarchical repre-
ditional approach often mistakenly sentations, isomorphic representations,
equates a task's distributed representa- and distributed representations.
tion that has both internal and external Many distributed cognitive tasks
components to the task's internal repre- have multi-level hierarchical represen-
sentation. This confusion often leads tations (see Zhang, 1992, for a few ex-
one to postulate complex internal amples). At each level of a task's hier-
mechanisms to explain the complex archical representation, there is an ab-
structure of the wrongly identified in- stract structure that can be implemented
ternal representation, much of which is by different isomorphic representations.
merely a reflection of the structure of For some levels, the isomorphic repre-
the external representation. sentations can be distributed representa-
tions. By decomposing the representa-
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
5
tion of a task into its component levels, structure of the TOH was not analyzed
we can identify the representational in these studies. In this section, we use
properties at each level that are respon- the principles of distributed representa-
sible for a different aspect of the repre- tions and the methodology of represen-
sentational effect. It should be noted tational analysis described in last section
that different tasks usually have differ- to analyze the representational struc-
ent hierarchical structures and have dif- ture of the TOH in a systematic way.
ferent representational properties at
their component levels. The key of the
methodology of representational analy-
sis is the strategy of decomposing a task
into its component levels and studying
the representational properties at each
Figure 2. The standard Tower of Hanoi prob-
level.
lem. The task is to move the three disks from
The methodology of representa-
one configuration to another, following two
tional analysis is fully illustrated in the rules: (1) Only one disk can be transferred at
analysis of the representational struc- a time; (2) A disk can only be transferred to a
ture of the Tower of Hanoi problem in pole on which it will be the largest.
next section. It has also been used to
Rule Representations
study several real world problems, in-
The standard TOH1 shown in Figure 2
cluding numeration systems, relational
has two internal rules: (1) only one disk
information displays, and cockpit in-
can be transferred at a time; (2) a disk
strument displays (Zhang, 1992).
can only be transferred to a pole on
which it will be the largest. These two
THE REPRESENTATIONAL
rules have to be memorized. The TOH
STRUCTURE OF THE TOH
in Figure 2 also has one external rule:
The Tower of Hanoi (henceforth TOH;
(3) only the largest disk on a pole can be
see Figures 2 and 3) is a well-studied
transferred to another pole. In the rep-
problem. Much of the research has fo-
resentation shown in Figure 2, Rule 3
cused on its isomorphs and problem
need not be stated explicitly because the
representations (e.g., Hayes & Simon,
physical structure of the disks and poles
1977; Kotovsky & Fallside, 1989;
coupled with Rule 1 guarantee that it
Kotovsky, Hayes & Simon, 1985; Simon
will be followed. But if the disks were
& Hayes, 1976). The basic finding is that
not stacked on poles, explicit statement
different problem representations can
of Rule 3 would be necessary. In our
have dramatic impact on problem diffi-
studies we used four rules2 :
culty even if the formal structures are
the same. Many of these studies either
1 The disk sizes of the traditional TOH are the reverse
explicitly or implicitly mentioned ex-
of those shown in Figure 2: the largest disk is at the
ternal representations. However, they
bottom and the smallest is at the top. The disk sizes have
did not consider internal and external been reversed to make all experimental designs
representations as two indispensable consistent. We call the size-reversed TOH with disks
and poles in Figure 2 our standard TOH, because all
parts of the representational system of
other TOH isomorphs in our present study were derived
the TOH, and they did not separate ex-
from this version.
ternal representations from internal 2 Experiments 1A and 1B used all four rules.
ones. Furthermore, the hierarchical Experiments 2 and 3 only used Rules 1, 2, and 3, which
are the three rules for the standard TOH.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
6
S3
E2
E1
S1 S2
E3
Figure 3. The problem space of the Tower of Hanoi problem. Each rectangle shows one of the 27 pos-
sible configurations (states) of the three disks on the three poles. The lines between the rectangles
show the transformations from one state to another when the rules are followed. S1, S2, and S3 are
three starting states, and E1, E2, and E3 are three ending states. They will be used later in the ex-
periments.
Any of these four rules can be ei-
Rule 1: Only one disk can be transferred ther internal or external. Internal rules
at a time. are memorized rules that are explicitly
Rule 2: A disk can only be transferred to stated as written propositions in the in-
a pole on which it will be the structions for experiments. External
largest. rules are not stated in any form in the
Rule 3: Only the largest disk on a pole instructions. They are the constraints
can be transferred to another that are embedded in or implied by
pole. physical configurations and can be per-
Rule 4: The smallest disk and the largest ceived and followed without being ex-
disk can not be placed on a sin- plicitly formulated. Some external
gle pole unless the medium rules may sometimes depend on other
sized disk is also on that pole. internal rules and/or some background
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
7
knowledge. For example, the external external. In Condition I1-E23 (Figure
Rule 3 in the standard TOH depends on 11C, in Experiment 1B; and Figure 12C,
the internal Rule 1, because Rule 3 is a in Experiment 2), Rules 2 and 3 are ex-
rule about the movement of a single ob- ternal. In Condition I1-E234 (Figure 11D,
ject3 . In addition, Rules 2 and 3, in Experiment 1B), Rules 2, 3, and 4 are
whether they are implemented as ex- external. Detailed explanations of these
ternal or internal rules, require that external rules are described in
only one hand can be used to move the Experiment 1B and Experiment 2.
objects and the objects can only be
placed on the three poles (or plates, see Problem Space Structures
Figures 11 & 12), because otherwise we A problem space of the TOH is com-
can always use the spare hand or an- posed of all possible states and moves
other place (e.g., table surface) as a tem- constrained by the rules. Figures 4A-E
porary holder (equivalent to the addi- show the problem spaces constrained by
tion of a fourth pole for the standard Rules 1, 1+2, 1+3, 1+2+3, and 1+2+3+4,
TOH) such that Rules 2 and 3 can be by- respectively (see footnote 3) They are
passed. These two extra requirements derived from the problem space shown
are embedded in the cover stories for in Figure 3. The rectangles (problem
the experiments (see Figure 9), and they states) in Figure 3 are not shown in
are not counted as internal rules. Figure 4 for the reason of clarity.
Furthermore, Rule 2 in the Waitress Figures 4A-D have the same 27 problem
and Coffee TOH (see Figure 11) is an ex- states as in Figure 3. Figure 4E only has
ternal rule that needs some cultural 21 problem states (shown by the dots),
knowledge: spilling coffee in front of a which are the outer 21 rectangles in
customer is not a good behavior for a Figure 3. Lines with arrows are uni-
waitress or a waiter (see Experiment 1B directional; lines without arrows are bi-
for details). Even though some external directional. One important point is that
rules are not fully independent and not these five spaces can represent internal,
truly external, we still call them exter- external, or mixed problem spaces, de-
nal rules in the sense that they are not pending upon how the rules construct-
stated and memorized but nevertheless ing them are distributed across internal
functionally equivalent to those that are and external representations. A prob-
explicitly stated and memorized. lem space constructed by external rules
In the experiments that follow, we is an external problem space, one con-
varied the number of external rules. In structed by internal rules is an internal
Condition I1 (Figure 11A, in problem space, and one constructed by a
Experiment 1B) and Condition I123 mixture of internal and external rules is
(Figure 12A, in Experiment 2), no rule is a mixed problem space. Figure 4B is the
external. In Conditions I1-E3 (Figure internal problem space of the standard
11B, in Experiment 1B) and I12-E3 TOH because Rules 1 and 2 are internal.
(Figure 12B, in Experiment 2), Rule 3 is If the physical constraints imposed by
the disks themselves are such that only
one can be moved at a time (e.g., the
3 The four rules for the Tower of Hanoi are not fully or-
disks are large or heavy), then Figure 4C
thogonal. Rules 2, 3, and 4 are orthogonal to one an-
other and Rule 4 is orthogonal to Rule 1. However, is the external problem space of the
Rules 2 and 3 are not orthogonal to Rule 1, because Rule standard TOH because under this cir-
1 is the prerequisite of Rules 2 and 3.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
8
cumstance Rules 1 and 3 are both exter- forms the abstract problem space, which
nal. These two spaces form the dis- is equivalent to the problem space
tributed problem space of the standard shown in Figure 4D.
TOH (Figure 5), and their conjunction
(A) Rule 1 (B) Rules 1+2
(C) Rules 1+3 (D) Rules 1+2+3
¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥
¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥
(E) Rules 1+2+3+4
Figure 4. Problem spaces constructed by five different sets of rules. They are derived from
the problem space shown in Figure 3. Lines with arrows are uni-directional. Lines
without arrows are bi-directional. The rectangles (problem states) are not shown here for
the reason of clarity. (A)-(D) have the same 27 problem states as in Figure 3. (E) only
has 21 problem states (shown by the dots), which are the outer 21 rectangles in Figure 3.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
9
Distributed Problem Space
Internal
External
Problem Space
Problem Space
Abstract Problem Space
Figure 5. The distributed representation of the TOH. The distributed problem space is composed of
the internal and the external problem spaces. The abstract problem space is the conjunction of the
internal and the external problem spaces.
Dimensional Representations quired by the rules. The values on this
The standard TOH (Figure 2) has three dimension are constants, that is, the
disks, which possess two dimensions of sizes of the disks are fixed. The second
properties. The first is the ordinal di- is the nominal dimension represented
mension represented by the sizes of the by the locations of the disks, which also
three disks, which has three levels: has three levels: left, middle, right.
large > medium > small. The ordinal This dimension is called nominal di-
information on this dimension is re- mension because only the categorical
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
10
information of the three locations is the dimensional representations of the
needed for the rules. (For a description TOH are shown in Figure 14.
of psychological scales, see Stevens, The ordinal and nominal dimen-
1946, 1951.) The values on this dimen- sions of the TOH can be represented ei-
sion are variables, that is, a disk can be ther internally or externally. If the or-
at any of the three locations. The three dinal dimension is represented by phys-
poles in the standard TOH shown in ical properties that are on an ordinal (or
Figure 2 are not essential: they are only higher) scale (e.g., sizes or ordered loca-
used to construct the external Rule 3. tions), it can be represented externally.
The ordinal and nominal dimen- For example, the sizes of the balls in
sions do not have to be represented by Figure 6A are an external representa-
sizes and locations of the disks, as in the tion of the ordinal dimension because
standard TOH. They can be represented the ordinal relation is embedded in the
by any properties of any objects. For ex- physical properties (sizes) of the balls. If
ample, Figure 6 shows two TOH iso- the ordinal dimension is represented by
morphs whose ordinal and nominal physical properties that are on a nomi-
dimensions are represented by different nal scale, it must be represented inter-
properties. In Figure 6A, the ordinal nally. For example, if we use colors to
dimension is represented by the sizes of represent the ordinal dimension, we
the balls (large > medium > small), and must first arbitrarily assign an order to
the nominal dimension is represented them (e.g., red > green > yellow) and
by the locations of the balls (left, middle, then internalize this ordinal relation
and right). In Figure 6B, the ordinal (see Figures 14G, 14H, 14I for examples).
dimension is represented by the loca- The nominal dimension can be repre-
tions of the triangular cylinders (top > sented externally by physical properties
middle > bottom). Each cylinder has that are either on a nominal or on an
three different colors (R = red, G = ordinal scale, because an ordinal scale is
green, Y = yellow) on its three sides, also a nominal scale (but not vice
which represent the nominal dimen- versa).
sion. The sizes of the balls in Figure Furthermore, the ordinal and
6A are mapped to the locations of the nominal dimensions of the TOH can be
cylinders in Figure 6B, and the locations represented by either visual properties
in Figure 6A are mapped to the colors of (such as size, color, texture, and shape)
the cylinder sides in Figure 6B. For ex- or spatial properties (such as location).
ample, moving the largest ball from the The separation of spatial properties
right location to the left location in from visual properties is significant be-
Figure 6A corresponds to rotating the cause many studies have found that
top cylinder from the yellow side to the there are important anatomical and
red side in Figure 6B. More examples of
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
11
Ordinal Dimension Nominal Dimension
(A) (large > medium > small) (left, middle, right)
Y
(B) R
(top > middle > bottom) (red, green, yellow)
G
Figure 6. The mapping between dimensions of two TOH isomorphs. The three triangular
cylinders in (B) can be rotated independently around their axis. The three sides of each
cylinder have three different colors (R = red, G = green, Y = yellow). The sizes of the
balls (ordinal dimension) in (A) are mapped to the locations of the cylinders (ordinal
dimension) in (B), and the locations of the balls (nominal dimension) in (A) are mapped
to the colors of cylinder sides (nominal dimension) in (B). For example, moving the
largest ball from the right location to the left location in (A) corresponds to rotating the
top cylinder from the yellow side to the red side.
functional differences between visual tions of visual and spatial dimensions
and spatial representations. Mishkin, in the TOH task.
Ungerleider, & Macko (1983) found that
there are two separate systems for vi- The Abstract Structure of the TOH
sual and spatial information processing: The TOH has a goal, a set of rules, two
visual information processing follows a dimensions, and three objects. Figure 7
projection from the occipital to the shows the abstract structure of the TOH
temporal cortex, and spatial informa- (see also Figure 8, which will be ex-
tion processing follows a projection plained in the following section). The
from the occipital to the parietal cortex. goal is defined by an initial and a final
Goldman-Rakic (1992) showed that problem state. The rules can vary in
among the prefrontal neurons respon- numbers, that is, any subset of the four
sible for working memory, some only rules or all of them can be chosen for a
respond to spatial locations while oth- given version of the TOH. The rules in
ers only respond to visual properties. a given set can be distributed across in-
Treisman & Gelade (1980) found that ternal and external representations in
the visual and spatial properties of a different ways. The two dimensions
stimulus are processed differently in can be represented by different physical
perceptual tasks and that location is re- properties. O , O , and O are the three
1 2 3
quired for focused attention to conjunc- levels of the ordinal dimension, and
tive stimuli. The differences between N , N , and N are the three levels of
1 2 3
visual and spatial representations may the nominal dimension. An object OBJ
i
have important implications for com- is described as OBJ = (O, N), which can
i i l
plex cognitive tasks such as problem be at three different levels on the nom-
solving and reasoning. One of the pur- inal dimension: (O , N ), (O , N ), (O ,
i 1 i 2 i
poses of Experiment 3 in the present N ). The three objects can be repre-
3
study is to examine the different func- sented by different physical entities.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
12
¥ Two property dimensions.
Ordinal dimension. 3 levels: O
1
> O
2
> O
3
.
Nominal dimension. 3 levels: N , N , N .
1 2 3
¥ Object: OBJ = (O, N). i = 1, 2, 3; l = 1, 2, 3.
i i l
= 1,
¥ Problem state: S(l, m, n) = ((O , N), (O , N ), (O , N )). l, m, n 2, 3.
1 l 2 m 3 n
¹
¥ Operation: OP(O, N) = (O, N ). l m.
i l i m
¥ Rules:
1: OP is a unary operator.
2: When OBJ = (O, N ), OP(O, N) = (O, N ) is true if O > O
j j m i l i m i j.
3: When OBJ = (O, N) & OBJ = (O, N), OP(O, N) is true if O > O.
i i l j j l i l i j
4. OBJ = (O , N ) & OBJ = (O , N ) is true if OBJ = (O , N )
1 1 m 3 3 m 2 2 m
®
¥ Goal: S(lÕ, mÕ, nÕ) S(lÓ, mÓ, nÓ).
Figure 7. The abstract structure of the TOH. O , O , and O are the three levels of the ordinal
1 2 3
dimension, and N , N , and N are the three levels of the nominal dimension. An object OBJ is
1 2 3 i
described as OBJ
i
= (O
i
, N
l
), which can be at three different levels on the nominal dimension: (O
i
,
N ), (O, N ),(O, N ). All four rules or any subset of them can be chosen for a given problem.
1 i 2 i 3
The Hierarchical Representation of the Different sets of rules construct different
Tower Of Hanoi problem spaces. Figure 4 shows prob-
lem spaces constructed by different sets
From the abstract structure of the TOH of rules: Rule 1, Rules 1+2, Rules 1+3,
(Figure 7), we can identify four levels of Rules 1+2+3, and Rules 1+2+3+4.
representations: problem space struc- Problems that have different problem
tures, rule representations, dimensional spaces are isomorphic at this level if
representations, and object representa- their goals (initial and final states) are
tions. At each level, there is an abstract the same. At this level, the formal
structure that can be implemented by properties of problem space structures
different representations. The different (such as the connections between prob-
representations at each level are iso- lem states and the total number of prob-
morphic in the sense that they all share lem states) are the major factors that af-
the same abstract structure at that par- fect problem solving behavior.
ticular level. The hierarchical represen- In Figure 4, when the number of
tation of the TOH is summarized in rules increases, problem space struc-
Figure 8, and the details are described as tures become more constrained and
follows. problem solving behavior might
change accordingly. The effect of the
The Level of Problem Space Structures structural change of a problem space on
The problem space of a problem is problem solving behavior might de-
composed of all possible states and all pend on the nature of the rules
moves constrained by the rules of the (whether internal or external).
problem. The TOH is not bound to the Experiments 1A and 1B were designed
three rules of the standard TOH. to examine these two factors. In
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
13
Experiment 1A, the change of the prob- and the same nominal information on
lem space structure was caused by in- the nominal dimension.
ternal rules, while in Experiment 1B, it There are two factors at this level
was caused by external rules. that might affect the problem solving
behavior of the TOH. The first factor is
The Level of Rule Representations whether the ordinal dimension of the
Given a set of rules, say, Rules 1, 2, TOH is represented internally (e.g., by
and 3, the abstract problem space con- colors) or externally (e.g., by sizes and
structed by them is fixed. However, the locations). The second factor is whether
rules can be distributed across internal the ordinal and nominal dimensions of
and external representations in differ- the TOH are represented by visual
ent ways. For example, Rule 1 may be properties (e.g., size and color) or spatial
internal and Rules 2 and 3 external, or properties (e.g., location). The different
Rules 1 and 2 internal and Rule 3 exter- representational properties of internal
nal, or all three rules internal (see and external dimensions and those of
Figure 12). Problems that have the visual and spatial dimensions may
same set of rules but different distribu- produce different processing strategies
tions of rules are isomorphic to each for the problem solving of the TOH.
other at this level in the sense that they Experiment 3 was designed to examine
all have the same abstract problem these two factors.
space. Experiment 2 was designed to
study the effect of the distributed repre- The Level of Object Representations
sentation of rules on problem solving The problems that are isomorphic
behavior. at all previous three levels can be iso-
morphic at still another levelÑthe
The Level of Dimensional level of object representations. At this
Representations level, different objects can be used. For
The ordinal and the nominal di- example, when the ordinal dimension
mensions of the TOH do not have to be is represented by sizes, we can use dif-
represented by sizes and locations as in ferent sized disks or different sized balls.
the standard TOH. They can be repre- For the same reason, when the nominal
sented by any properties (see Figure 6 dimension is represented by colors, we
and Figure 14 for examples). Problems can use different sets of colors to repre-
whose ordinal and nominal dimen- sent the nominal dimension, e.g., red,
sions are represented by different prop- green, and yellow, or purple, blue, and
erties are isomorphic to each other at pink. The representational properties at
this level in the sense that the different this level usually do not have as large
properties represent the same ordinal effects as those at the first three levels.
information on the ordinal dimension
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
14
Final
State
Initial
State
R ul e 1
R
ules 1 &
2
R
ules 1, 2,
& 3
ules
1, 2, 3,
& 4
R
External Space Internal Space External Space Internal Space
(Rule 1) (Rules 1, 2, & 3) (Rules 1 & 3) (Rules 1 & 2)
R Y G
SSSiiizzzeee---LLLooocccaaatttiiiooonnn Size-Color
Location-Size Location-Location
Size-Location SSSiiizzzeee---LLLooocccaaatttiiiooonnn SSSiiizzzeee---LLLooocccaaatttiiiooonnn
ecapS
melborP
eluR
lanoisnemiD
tcejbO
serutcurtS
snoitatneserpeR
snoitatneserpeR
snoitatneserpeR
Figure 8. The hierarchical representation of the TOH. At the level of problem space structures,
different sets of rules construct different problem spaces. At the level of rule representations, the
same set of rules can be distributed across internal and external representations in different ways.
At the level of dimensional representations, the ordinal and nominal dimensions can be represented
by different properties. At the level of object representations, different objects can be used.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
15
EXPERIMENT 1A: PROBLEM SPACE for Condition I1234 are shown in
STRUCTURES (INTERNAL) Figure 9. The instructions for
Conditions I123, I13, and I1 were the
In Experiments 1A and 1B, we study same as for I1234, except that different
isomorphic representations at the level sets of rules were stated in the instruc-
of problem space structures. tions.
Isomorphic representations at this level
have the same goal but different prob- Method
lem spaces constructed by different sets Subjects
of rules. Figure 4 shows that the prob- The subjects were 24 undergradu-
lem spaces become more constrained ate students enrolled in introductory
with the increase of the number of psychology courses at the University of
rules. How does the structural change California, San Diego, who volunteered
of the problem space affect problem for the experiment to earn course credit.
solving behavior? There are at least
two rival factors. On the one hand, the Materials
fewer rules, the more paths there are Three plastic orange balls of differ-
from an initial state to a final state. ent sizes (small, medium, and large)
Hence, fewer rules might make the and three porcelain plates were used for
problem easier. On the other hand, the all four conditions.
more rules, the fewer the choices.
Subjects can simply follow where the Design
highly constrained structure forces Each subject played all four games,
them to go. So, more rules might make once each. There were twenty-four pos-
the problem easier. This implies that sible permutations for the four games.
the problem difficulty might not change The twenty-four subjects were assigned
monotonically with the number of to these permutations randomly. Due
rules. The effect on problem solving to a limitation in the number of sub-
behavior caused by the structural jects available, the first, second, third,
change of the problem space might also and fourth games always started at posi-
depend on the nature of the rules tions S1, S2, S3, and S1 and ended at
(whether internal or external). positions E1, E2, E3, and E1, respectively
Experiments 1A and 1B examine these (see Figure 3). This treatment was not
effects. In Experiment 1A, all rules are expected to cause significant systematic
internal. We change the number of in- deviation because the task structures of
ternal rules. In Experiment 1B, all but the four problems each subject solved
Rule 1 are external. We change the were different from each other, and the
number of external rules. games were randomized.
Experiment 1A has four condi-
tions, in which all rules were internal. Procedure
Condition I1 has Rule 1, Condition I13 Each subject seated in front of a
has Rules 1 and 3, Condition I123 has table and read the instructions aloud
Rules 1, 2, and 3, and Condition I1234 slowly. Then the subject was asked to
has Rules 1, 2, 3, and 4. We made a turn the instruction sheet over and to
restaurant story (Waitress and Oranges) attempt to repeat all the rules. If the
for the instructions. The instructions subject could recite all the rules twice
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
16
Waitress and Oranges
A strange, exotic restaurant requires everything to be done in a special manner. Here is an
example. Three customers sitting at the counter each ordered an orange. The customer on the
left ordered a large orange. The customer in the middle ordered a medium sized orange.
And the customer on the right ordered a small orange. The waitress brought all three
oranges in one plate and placed them all in front of the middle customer (as shown in
Diagram 1). Because of the exotic style of this restaurant, the waitress had to move the
oranges to the proper customers following a strange ritual. No orange was allowed to touch
the surface of the table. The waitress had to use only one hand to rearrange these three
oranges so that each orange would be placed in the correct plate (as shown in Diagram 2),
following these rules:
¥ Only one orange can be transferred at a time. (Rule 1 )
¥ An orange can only be transferred to a plate on which it will be the largest. (Rule 2)
¥ Only the largest orange in a plate can be transferred to another plate. (Rule 3)
¥ The smallest orange and the largest orange can not be placed on a single plate unless
the medium sized orange is also on that plate (Rule 4).
How would the waitress do this? That is, you solve the problem and show the movement of
oranges the waitress has to do to go from the arrangement shown in Diagram 1 to the
arrangement shown in Diagram 2.
Diagram 1
Diagram 2
Figure 9. The instructions for the I1234 condition in Experiment 1A. The instructions for other three
conditions were the same as the one shown here, except that different sets of rules were stated.
without error, the subject was in- I1234, respectively. In order to make
structed to start the games. Otherwise meaningful comparisons, solution
the subject reread the instructions and times, solution steps, and errors for
was again tested. The cycle continued each condition were normalized by be-
until the subject reached the criterion. ing divided by the number of mini-
The final states were presented to the mum steps for each condition. The p
subject in diagrams. A subjectÕs hand values of the main effects and multiple
movements and speech were recorded comparisons are shown in the upper
by a video camera. The solution time, half of Table 1. When solution times
which was from the time the experi- and errors are used as the difficulty
menter said "start" to when the subject measurements, the difficulty order was,
£
finished the last move, was recorded by from easiest to hardest: I1 < I13 < I1234
a timer synchronized with the video I123. The difference between I1234 and
camera. I123 was not statistically significant.
When solution steps are used as the dif-
Results ficulty measurement, the difficulty or-
£
The results are shown in Figure 10. The der remained the same (I1 < I13 I1234
minimum numbers of steps from the < I123), but in this case the difference be-
starting state to the final state are 2, 4, 7, tween I13 and I1234 was not statistically
and 8 for Conditions I1, I13, I123, and significant.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
17
25
B
20
B
15
J
10 B J
J
5
JB
0
1 2 3 4
spetS
.niM/semiT
3
B
2 B J
J B
J
1 BJ
0
1 2 3 4
Number of Rules
B Experiment 1A
(Internal Rules)
J Experiment 1B
(External Rules)
spetS
.niM/spetS
Number of Rules
0.3
B B
0.2
0.1
B
0 JB J J J
1 2 3 4
spetS
.niM/srorrE
I123 I123
I1234
I13 I1234
I1-E23 I1-E234
I13 I1-E234 I1 I1-E3
I1-E23
I1
I1 I1-E3
I1
I123 I1234
I13
I1
I1 I1-E3 I1-E23 I1-E234
Number of Rules
Figure 10. The results of Experiments 1A and 1B. Solution times were measured in seconds. The min-
imum numbers of steps to solve the problems are 2, 4, 7, and 8 for Conditions I1, I13, I123, and I1234,
respectively. In order to make meaningful comparisons, solution times, steps, and errors for each
condition were normalized by being divided by the number of minimum steps for each condition.
Table 1. p Values of Experiments 1A and 1B
Measurements
Comparisons Times Steps Errors
Experiment 1A
Main Effect < .0001 < .0001 < .0001
I1 vs. I13 < .05 < .005 < .06
I1 vs. I123 < .00001 < .00001 < .001
I1 vs. I1234 < .00001 < .01 < .001
I13 vs. I123 < .02 < .01 < .005
I13 vs. I1234 < .005 > .6 < .01
I123 vs. I1234 > .36 < .003 > .75
Experiment 1B
Main Effect < .0001 < .0001 Ñ
I1 vs. I1-E3 < .01 < .1 Ñ
I1 vs. I1-E23 < .0001 < .0001 Ñ
I1 vs. I1-E234 < .00001 < .00001 Ñ
I1-E3 vs. I1-E23 > .18 < .01 Ñ
I1-E3 vs. I1-E234 < .0001 < .0001 Ñ
I1-E23 vs. I1-E234 < .03 > .4 Ñ
NOTE. Fisher PLSD test was used for the multiple comparisons.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
18
EXPERIMENT 1B: PROBLEM SPACE cover story in Figure 9). In this sense,
STRUCTURES (EXTERNAL) Rule 2 was not a truly external rule
with rigid physical constraints, but an
Experiment 1B was exactly the same as
external rule grounded in cultural
Experiment 1A, except that Rules 2, 3,
knowledge. Rule 3 in this condition
and 4 were external rather than inter-
was external because a cup could not be
nal. There were also four conditions.
moved if there was another cup on its
In Condition I1 (Waitress and Oranges,
top. In Condition I1-E234 (Waitress and
Figure 11A), Rule 1 was the only inter-
Tea, Figure 11D), Rule 1 was internal
nal rule. In Condition I1-E3 (Waitress
and Rules 2, 3, and 4 were external. All
and Straws, Figure 11B), Rule 1 was in-
cups were filled with tea. Rules 2 and 3
ternal and Rule 3 was external. A
in this condition were external for the
smaller straw could be dropped into a
same reason described in Condition I1-
larger straw and a larger straw could be
E23: a smaller cup could not be placed
placed outside (around) a smaller straw
on the top of a larger one (Rule 2), and
(that is, Rule 2 was not implemented
only the largest (topmost) cup could be
here). However, the diameters of the
moved (Rule 3). Rule 4 were external
three straws were so small (1 cm, 1.5 cm,
because the bottom of the largest cup
and 2 cm, respectively) that a smaller
was smaller than the top of the smallest
straw inside a larger one could not be
cup and the bottom of the smallest cup
moved out without the larger straw be-
was smaller than the top of the largest
ing moved away first (external Rule 3).
cup, that is, the largest cup and the
In Condition I1-E23 (Waitress and
smallest cup could not be placed on the
Coffee, Figure 11C), Rule 1 was internal
top of each other.
and Rules 2 and 3 were external. All
The instructions for these four
cups were filled with coffee. A smaller
conditions were the same as for the
cup could not be placed on the top of a
I1234 condition in Experiment 1A, ex-
larger cup (external Rule 2), as this
cept that different words for different
would cause the coffee to spill. All sub-
materials were used and only internal
jects understood that spilling coffee was
Rule 1 was stated in the instructions (all
not a good behavior because they had to
other rules were not stated because they
imagine that they were waitresses or
were external).
waiters working in a restaurant (see the
(A) I1 (B) I1-E3
(C) I1-E23 (D) I1-E234
Figure 11. The four conditions of Experiment 1B. See text for explanations. (A) I1: Rule 1 is
internal. (B) I1-E3: Rule 1 is internal and Rule 3 is external. (C) I1-E23: Rule 1 is internal and Rules
2 and 3 are external. (D) I1-E234: Rule 1 is internal and Rules 2, 3, and 4 are external.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
19
Method the difficulty order remained the same
£
Subjects (I1 < I1-E3 < I1-E23 I1-E234), but the
The subjects were 24 undergradu- difference between I1-E23 and I1-E234 is
ate students enrolled in introductory not statistically significant. Subjects
psychology courses at the University of didnÕt make any errors in this experi-
California, San Diego, who volunteered ment.
for the experiment to earn course credit.
Discussion
Materials From the results of Experiments 1A and
Materials for Condition I1 were 1B, we can see that problem space struc-
the same as in Experiment 1A. In ture is an important factor of problem
Condition I1-E3, the straws and tiny difficulty. For example, the solution
plates were made from paperboard. The time difference between the easiest
diameters and heights of the small, problem (I1) and the hardest problem
medium, and large straws were approx- (I123) can be as large as a ratio of one to
imately 1 cm, 1.5 cm, and 2 cm, and 3 ten. We can also see that the effect of
cm, 6 cm, and 9 cm, respectively. In the structural change of a problem space
Condition I1-E23, three plastic cups of on problem solving behavior depended
different sizes (small, medium, and on the nature of the rules. When all
large) and three paper plates were used. but one rule were external (Experiment
All three cups were filled with coffee. 1B), a problem became more difficult
In Condition I1-E234, three cups made when its problem space became more
from metal cans and three paper plates constrained (more rules). However,
were used. All three cups were filled when all rules were internal
with tea. (Experiment 1A), the hardest problem
was neither the most constrained one
Design and Procedure (I1234) nor the least constrained one
The design and procedure were the (I1), but the intermediately constrained
same as in Experiment 1A. problem (I123).
Two factors, working memory and
Results problem structure, might contribute to
The results are shown in Figure 10. The the different difficulty orders caused by
solution times, solution steps, and er- the nature of rules. In Experiment 1A,
rors for all four conditions were nor- all rules were internal. The working
malized by being divided by the mini- memory load was high for both I123
mum number of steps for each condi- and I1234 (three and four internal
tion, as in Experiment 1A. The p values rules, respectively). One possible expla-
of the main effects and multiple com- nation is that subjects could not do
parisons are shown in the lower half of much planning because most of the
Table 1. If solution times are used as working memory was loaded by the
the difficulty measurement, the diffi- processing of the internal rules. In this
culty order was, from easiest to hardest: case, the structure of the problem space
£
I1 < I1-E3 I1-E23 < I1-E234. The differ- might be the dominant factor of prob-
ence between I1-E3 and I1-E23 is not sta- lem difficulty. Moves were to a large
tistically significant. If solution steps extent guided by the structure of the
are used as the difficulty measurement, problem space. I1234 was easier than
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
20
I123 problem because it was more con- tributed across internal and external
strained than I123 . In Experiment 1B, representations in different ways. In
all but Rule 1 were external. In this the I123 (Waitress and Oranges ) condi-
case, planning was probably the domi- tion (Figure 12A), Rules 1, 2, and 3 were
nant factor of problem difficulty because all internal. In the I12-E3 (Waitress and
there was little load on working mem- Donuts) condition (Figure 12B), Rules 1
ory. This explains why I1-E23 was easier and 2 were internal, and Rule 3 was ex-
than I1-E234, even though I1-E234 was ternal. This is the standard TOH. Rule
more constrained than I1-E23. 3 was external because the physical con-
All four rules in Experiment 1A straints (coupled with Rule 1) guaran-
were internal and three of the four teed that it was followed (see the previ-
rules in Experiment 1B were external. ous discussion in the section Rule
Comparing the results in these two ex- Representations for more explanations).
periments, we found that the condi- In the I1-E23 (Waitress and Coffee) con-
tions with external rules in Experiment dition (Figure 12C), Rule 1 was internal,
1B were easier than their corresponding and Rules 2 and 3 were external. This
conditions with internal rules in was identical to the I1-E23 condtion in
Experiment 1A. In other words, exter- Experiment 2B. The instructions for all
nal rules could make problems easier. three conditions were the same as for
This was explicitly tested in Experiment the I1234 condition in Experiment 1A,
2, which follows. except that different words suitable for
the materials used in the current exper-
EXPERIMENT 2: THE DISTRIBUTED iment were used and that only internal
REPRESENTATION OF RULES rules were stated in the current instruc-
tions (external rules need not be stated
In this experiment, we study isomor- explicitly).
phic representations at the level of rule
representations. We have shown that a Method
problem space is constructed by a set of Subjects
rules. Given the same set of rules, the The subjects were 18 undergradu-
abstract problem space is fixed. ate students enrolled in introductory
However, the rules can be distributed psychology courses at the University of
across internal and external representa- California, San Diego who volunteered
tions in different ways. Different distri- for the experiment to earn course credit.
butions may have different effects on
problem solving behavior, even if the Materials
formal structures are the same. This The materials in the I123 condition
experiment examines these effects. Our were the same as in the I123 condition
hypothesis is that the more rules are in Experiment 1A. In the I12-E3 condi-
distributed in the external representa- tion, three plastic rings of different sizes
tion, the easier the problem. (small, medium, and large) and three
There were three conditions in this plastic poles were used. The materials
experiment, which all had three rules. in the I1-E23 condition were the same as
Though the three rules were the same in the I1-E23 condition in Experiment
in their abstract forms, they were dis- 1B.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
21
(A) I123
(B) I12-E3 (C) I1-E23
Figure 12. The three conditions of Experiment 2. See text for explanations. (A) I123: All three rules
are internal. (B) I12-E3: Rules 1 and 2 are internal and Rules 3 is external. (C) I1-E23: Rule 1 is
internal and Rules 2 and 3 are external.
Design solution times, steps, and errors for the
Each subject played all three games, three problems was consistent. The
one for each of the three conditions, more rules were external, the easier the
once in a randomized order (e.g., I1-E23, problem. The order of difficulty was,
³
I123, I12-E3). There were six possible from hardest to easiest: I123 > I12-E3
permutations for the three games. Each I1-E23. The difference between I12-E3
permutation was assigned to a subject and I1-E23 was not statistically signifi-
randomly. There were a total of eigh- cant. All errors made were for internal
teen subjects. Due to a limitation in the rules: none were for external rules.
number of subjects available, the start-
ing and ending positions were not ran- Discussion
domized. That is, for each subject, the Two of the three conditions in the pre-
first, the second, and the third games sent experiment, I123 and I12-E3, were
always started at positions S1, S2, and S3 modifications of the Dish-move and
and ended at positions E1, E2, and E3, Peg-move problems of Kotovsky, Hayes,
respectively (see Figure 3). The starting and Simon (1985). The results from the
and ending positions should not cause present study are consistent with their
significant systematic deviation because results: subjects took more time to solve
the three pairs of starting and ending I123 than I12-E3. Kotovsky, Hayes, and
positions were exactly symmetric, and Simon only reported solution times in
the order of the three games played by their study. The numbers of steps and
each subject was randomized. errors in the present study are all con-
sistent with solution times. In the pre-
Procedure sent experiment, the more rules exter-
The procedure was the same as in nalized, the easier the problem. In addi-
Experiment 1A. tion, external rules seem to be error
proof: subject did not make any errors
Results for external rules. This effect might be
The average solution times, solution due to the fact that the external rules
steps, and errors are shown in Figure 13. were either perceptually available or
The p values for the main effects and physically constrained. The errors for
multiple comparisons are shown in internal errors might be caused by the
Table 2. Problem difficulty measured in load of working memory.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
22
150
B
125
100
B
75
B
50
25
0
I123 I12-E3 I1-E23
).ces(
semiT
noituloS
25
20 B
15 B
B
10
5
0
I123 I12-E3 I1-E23
Conditions
spetS
noituloS
1.5
B
1
B
0.5
B
0
I123 I12-E3 I1-E23
Conditions
srorrE
Conditions
Figure 13. The results of Experiment 2. Problem difficulty decreased with the increase of the
number of external rules.
Table 2. The p Values of Experiment 2
Measurements
Comparisons Times Steps Errors
Main Effect < .05 < .05 < .005
I123 vs. I12-E3 < .1 < .1 < .03
I123 vs. I1-E23 < .01 < .02 < .001
I12-E3 vs. I1-E23 > .3 > .4 > .2
NOTE: Fisher PLSD test was used for the multiple comparisons.
Why did external rules make prob- solve the problem. Among the fifty-
lems easier? There might be two fac- four games played by the eighteen sub-
tors. The first is the checking of rules jects, the last three steps were solved in
before each move. External rules can be three steps in fifty-two games and in
checked by perceptual inspection, while five steps in only two games.
internal rules must be checked men- Therefore, if either the small or the
tally. The processing of internal rules medium object is in the final state, the
in the mind, which demands more re- game is virtually solved. Rule 2 might
sources of working memory, might in- be critical for the discovery of the recur-
terfere with other processes critical for sive strategy. For the I1-E23 condition,
problem solving, such as planning. The Rule 2 was external: a smaller cup of
second factor is the recursive strategyÑ coffee could not be placed on the top of
the strategy to reduce a three-object a larger one. This external representa-
problem to a two-object problem, or in tion might have prompted the subjects
other words, move the smallest object that the smallest cup had to be moved
to its destination first. From the prob- to its final state first. Out of the eigh-
lem space of the TOH (Figure 3) we can teen games for the I1-E23 condition, six-
see that for any pair of starting and end- teen were solved by moving the small-
ing states, as long as either the small or est cup to its final state first. The other
the medium object is in its final state, two were solved by moving the
only three more steps are needed to medium sized cup to its final state first.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
23
For the I123 and the I12-E3 conditions, (ordered) locations, because the ordinal
Rule 2 was internal. Thus, the recur- relation is embedded in the physical
sive strategy was harder to discover. properties of sizes and locations. But it
Out of the eighteen games for the I123 is represented internally by colors, be-
condition, only eleven were solved by cause the order of colors is arbitrary and
moving the smallest object to its final has to be internalized. (The nominal
state first. The other seven were solved dimension is represented externally by
by moving the medium sized object to sizes, locations, and colors.) The second
its final state first. Similarly, out of the factor is whether the ordinal and nom-
eighteen games for the I12-E3 condition, inal dimensions are represented by vi-
the numbers for the two cases were ten sual properties (sizes and colors) or spa-
and eight, respectively. Thus, the ease tial properties (locations). The instruc-
of discovering the recursive strategy in tions for the O(size)-N(size) condition
the I1-E23 condition might have also are shown in Figure 15. The instruc-
contributed to the difficulty order. tions for other conditions were the
same as for the O(size)-N(size) condi-
tion, except that modifications were
EXPERIMENT 3: DIMENSIONAL made for different materials used in dif-
REPRESENTATIONS ferent conditions.
We hypothesize that external di-
In this experiment, we study isomor- mensions need less mental processing
phic representations at the level of di- than internal dimensions, and that spa-
mensional representations. The ordi- tial dimensions support more efficient
nal and nominal dimensions of the perceptual processing than visual di-
TOH can be represented by any proper- mensions. Thus, we have the follow-
ties. We chose size, location, and color ing predictions. For the ordinal dimen-
to represent these two dimensions, sion, sizes should be better than colors
which generated nine isomorphic rep- because the former represents the ordi-
resentations of the TOH (Figure 14). nal dimension externally while the lat-
(See Figure 6 as well as Figure 14 for ex- ter represents it internally, and loca-
planations on the dimensional repre- tions should better than sizes because
sentations and the mappings between the former is a spatial dimension while
dimensions). the latter is a visual dimension. In ad-
The nine isomorphs in Figure 14 dition, locations should be better than
were the nine conditions of this exper- colors because the former is not only an
iment, which had the same three inter- external dimension but also a spatial
nal rules. Among these nine iso- dimension. For the nominal dimen-
morphs, some might be easier than sion, locations should be better than
others. We consider two factors of prob- sizes and colors because the former is a
lem difficulty. The first factor is the na- spatial dimension while latter two are
ture (internal or external) of the ordinal visual dimensions. Sizes and colors
dimension. The ordinal dimension is should not differ from each other be-
represented externally by sizes and cause they are both visual dimensions.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
24
Nominal Dimension
Size Location Color
R Y G
(A) O(size)-N(size) (B) O(size)-N(location) (C) O(size)-N(color)
Y
R
G
(D) O(location)-N(size) (E) O(location)-N(location) (F) O(location)-N(color)
G
Y G R R Y G R Y Y R G
(G) O(color)-N(size) (H) O(color)-N(location) (I) O(color)-N(color)
noisnemiD
lanidrO
eziS
noitacoL
roloC
Figure 14. Nine isomorphs at the level of dimensional representations. O = Ordinal Dimension, N
= Nominal Dimension. For ordinal dimensions, the colors have a priority: red > green > yellow.
All triangular cylinders can be rotated around their axes. (A) Each cylinder has three different
sized circles on its three sides. O = sizes of the cylinders; N = sizes of the circles. (B) O = sizes of
the balls; N = locations of the balls. (C) Each cylinder has three colors (red, green, yellow) on its
three sides. O = sizes of the cylinders. N = colors of the sides. (D) Each cylinder has three
different sized circles on its three sides. O = locations of the cylinders (top, middle, bottom). N =
sizes of the circles. (E) The three disks can be moved horizontally among three locations. O =
vertical locations (top, middle, bottom). N = horizontal locations (left, middle, right). (F) Each
cylinder has three colors (red, green, yellow) on its three sides. O = locations of the cylinders (top,
middle, bottom). N = colors of the sides. (G) Each cylinder has a color (red, green, or yellow) on all
three sides. On the three sides of a cylinder there are three different sized circles. O = color
priority. N = sizes of the circles. (H) O = color priority. N = locations of the balls. (I) Each
cylinder has a color (red, green, or yellow) on all three sides. On the three sides of each cylinder
there are three circles of different colors (red, green, yellow). O = the color priority of the
cylinders. N = colors of the circles.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
25
Legend has it that in ancient India there was a Buddhist scripture in a locked
crypt hidden in a cave. Many people tried to acquire it because it possessed the secret of
life. However, none of them succeeded because if the crypt was not opened in a very
short time, it would disappear. The lock of the crypt was remotely controlled by three
magic triangular cylinders of different sizes (small, medium, and large). On the three
sides of each cylinder, there were three different sized circles (also small, medium, and
large). In order to open the crypt, one had to rotate the three cylinders to a specific
configuration, strictly following a set of rules. One day, a wise monk entered the cave.
Inspired by the wisdom of Buddha, he skillfully opened the crypt within the specified
time. How did he do it? You are given a replica of the magic cylinders. Try to solve
this puzzle as fast as you can. The rules are given below. The initial configuration you
will start with and the final configuration that opens the lock will be given to you
when you have memorized these rules.
Rule 1: Only one cylinder can be rotated at a time.
Rule 2: After rotating a cylinder, if the new facing side has a same sized circle
as that of another cylinder, the size of the cylinder you rotated must be
larger.
Rule 3: Before rotating a cylinder, if any cylinders have matching sized circles
facing you, only the largest cylinder can be rotated.
Figure 15. The instructions for the O(size)-N(size) condition. The instructions for other conditions
were the same as the one shown here, except that modifications were made for different objects in
different conditions.
Method within-subject factor was the ordinal
Subjects dimension. It had three levels: size, lo-
The subjects were 36 undergradu- cation, and color. The between-subject
ate students at the University of factor was the nominal dimension. It
California, San Diego who were paid for also had three levels: size, location, and
participating in this experiment. color. There were three games across
the three within-subject levels at each
Materials between-subject level. Each subject
The triangular cylinders in Figure played these three games once in a ran-
14 were made from paperboard and domized order (e.g., O(color)-N(size),
could be rotated around their vertical O(size)-N(size), and O(location)-
axes. In Figures 14D and 14F, the three N(size)). For the three games at each be-
cylinders were stacked on a vertical rod. tween-subject level, there were six pos-
In Figure 14B, three different sized plas- sible permutations. There were a total
tic balls were used. In Figure 14E, the of 18 possible permutations across the
three plastic disks could only be moved three between-subject levels. Each
horizontally. In Figure 14H, three permutation was assigned to two sub-
sponge balls of different colors (red, jects randomly. There were a total of 36
green, yellow) were used. subjects. Due to a limitation in the
number of subjects available, the start-
Design ing and ending positions were not ran-
This was a mixed design. The domized. That is, for each subject, the
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
26
first game always started at position S1 statistically better than colors, though
and ended at position E1 (see Figure 3), the solution steps for locations were
the second at position S2 and at position fewer than for colors. The difference of
E2, and the third at position S3 and at solution steps between colors and sizes
position E3. The starting and ending was not statistically significant.
positions were not expected to cause For the nominal dimension, when
much systematic deviation because the solution times and errors were used as
three pairs of starting and ending posi- the difficulty measurement, locations
tions were exactly symmetric, and the were significantly better than sizes and
three games played by each subject were colors. The difference between sizes
randomized. and colors was not statistically signifi-
cant. When solution steps were used as
Procedure the difficulty measurement, none of the
For each game, the subjects were differences between sizes, locations, and
asked to read the instructions aloud colors were statistically significant,
once and given two minutes to memo- though solution steps for locations were
rize the rules. The subjects were then fewer than for sizes and colors.
asked to recite all the rules. If the sub-
jects could recite all the rules without Discussion
errors, they were shown two examples We identified two factors that might af-
for each rule. Otherwise, the subjects fect problem solving behavior at the
read the instructions again and were level of dimensional representations.
again tested until they could recite all The first factor is whether the ordinal
the rules without errors. Before the dimensional is represented internally
subjects started the games, they were or externally. The results showed that
given the initial and final states. The although solution times and errors for
final state for each game was presented colors, which represent the ordinal di-
by a set of identical objects. Subjects' mension internally, were larger than
hand movements and speech were for sizes, which represent the ordinal
recorded by a video camera. dimension externally, the differences
were not statistically significant. This
Results might be because, compared with other
The solution times, steps, and errors are mental activities during the problem
shown in Figure 16. The p values are solving tasks, internalizing the color
shown in Table 3. For the ordinal di- priority (red>green>yellow) was a triv-
mension, when solution times and er- ial task. The second factor, whether a
rors were used as the difficulty mea- dimension is represented by visual or
surement, locations were significantly spatial properties, played a major role in
better than sizes and colors. Though determining problem difficulties.
the solution times and errors for sizes Locations were much better than sizes
were smaller than for colors, the differ- for the ordinal dimension and than
ences were not statistically significant. sizes and colors for the nominal dimen-
When solution steps were used as the sion. The superiority of locations over
difficulty measurement, locations were colors for the ordinal dimension was an
significantly better than sizes, but not effect caused by both factors.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
27
250
B
B
200
J
J
150
H
H
100 B
J
H
50
0
Color Size Location
)sdnoces(
semiT
noituloS
20
J
B 15 BH J H BJ
H
10
5
0
Color Size Location
Nominal Dimension
spetS
noituloS
Nominal Dimension
5 B B
4
J
3 J
H
H
2
1 BJ
H
0
Color Size Location
srorrE
Ordinal Dimension
B Color
J
Size
H
Location
Nominal Dimension
Figure 16. The results of Experiment 3.
Table 3. The p Values of Experiment 3
Measurements
Comparisons Times Steps Errors
O(size) vs. O(location) < .01 < .05 < .03
O(size) vs. O(color) > .17 > .53 > .15
O(location) vs. O(color) < .0007 > .2 < .004
N(size) vs. N(location) < .003 > .24 < .0001
N(size) vs. N(color) > .66 > .62 > .96
N(location) vs. N(color) < .016 > .17 < .007
NOTE. The comparisons were between dimensions, not between individual conditions. For
example, O(size) vs. O(location) was the comparison between the ordinal dimension
represented by sizes and the ordinal dimension represented by locations. None of the
interactions were statistically significant.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
28
Why were locations so special? In dimensions) is represented by locations,
the analysis of the dimensional repre- an extra step of invoking location in-
sentations of the TOH, we reviewed formation is needed to link the two
some empirical studies showing the separate visual maps of size and color.
important anatomical and functional In this case, the three values on the or-
differences between visual and spatial dinal dimension and the three values
representations (Goldman-Rakic 1992; on the nominal dimensions, as well as
Mishkin, Ungerleider, & Macko 1983; the three locations, have to be checked
Treisman & Gelade, 1980). Though the before an operation (moving or rotat-
results from the present experiment do ing) can be made. If one of the two con-
not allow us to offer a direct explana- junctive dimensions is represented by
tion of why locations (spatial dimen- locations, the extra step of invoking the
sion) were better than sizes and colors location information is not needed, be-
(visual dimensions), we can compare cause the location information itself is
our results with some perceptual tasks. in the conjunctive dimensions. In this
The ordinal and nominal dimensions case, only the three values on the di-
in the present experiment are conjunc- mension not represented by locations
tive dimensions. Treisman & Gelade and the three values on the dimension
(1980) proposed that location informa- of locations have to be checked before
tion is necessary for the perception of an operation can be made. Thus, if one
conjunctive stimuli. Nissen's (1985) of the ordinal and nominal dimensions
study of conjunctive stimuli based on or both of them are represented by loca-
visual maps is more directly related to tions, the problem is easier.
the present study. According to her,
color and shape are registered in sepa-
rate maps. When a conjunctive stimu- GENERAL DISCUSSION
lus was composed of color and location,
she showed that selecting an item by In this paper, we developed a theoreti-
color and reporting its location was as cal framework of distributed representa-
accurate as selecting by location and re- tions and a methodology of representa-
porting color. In this case, selection by tional analysis for the study of dis-
location did not have special advantage, tributed cognitive tasksÑtasks that re-
because location itself was part of the quire the processing of information dis-
conjunctive stimulus. However, when tributed across the internal mind and
a conjunctive stimulus is composed of the external environment, and applied
color and shape, location is necessary them to the empirical studies of the
for cross-referencing between the sepa- Tower of Hanoi problem. Our approach
rate shape and color maps. She showed to distributed cognitive tasks demands
that when subjects reported the shape (a) the consideration of the internal and
and location of an item cued by its color, external representations of a task as a
the accuracy of shape judgments de- representational system, (b) the explicit
pended on the accuracy of locating the decomposition of the representational
cued color. Comparing Nissen's study system into its internal and external
with the present study, we have parallel components, and (c) the identification
results. If neither of the two conjunc- of the different functions of internal
tive dimensions (ordinal and nominal and external representations in cogni-
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
29
tion. The traditional approach to cogni- processes. Though an representational
tion is not appropriate for the study of analysis should be the first step for the
distributed cognitive tasks, because it of- study of distributed cognitive tasks, a
ten ignores the important functions of process model is also essential. In order
external representations in cognition. to understand the nature of distributed
In addition, it often confuses a task's cognitive tasks, we need to study all of
distributed representation that has both the three aspects. Two interesting is-
internal and external components with sues worth of further studies are the re-
the task's internal representation. This lationship between representations and
confusion often leads to unnecessarily processes and the interplay between
complex accounts of cognition. perceptual and cognitive processes.
Formal Structures, Representations , The Nature of External Representations
and Processes External objects are not just peripheral
Any distributed cognitive task can be aids to cognition, they provide a differ-
analyzed into three aspects: its formal ent form of representationÑan external
structure, its representation, and its pro- representation. By decomposing the
cesses. Our present study focused on representational system of a distributed
representations and their relation to cognitive task into its internal and ex-
formal structures, for the following rea- ternal representations, we can separate
sons. First, in order to understand the the functions of external representa-
processes involved in a distributed cog- tions from those of internal representa-
nitive task, we first have to understand tions. The empirical studies reported
what information is processed and how here on the Tower of Hanoi problem
the information to be processed is rep- suggest the following properties of ex-
resented. Second, different processes ternal representations.
are activated by different representa- 1. External representations can
tions, but not vice versa. For example, provide memory aids. For example, in
perceptual processes are activated by ex- all of the TOH experiments reported
ternal representations, while cognitive here, the goal problem states didn't
processes are usually activated by inter- need to be memorized, because they
nal representations. Third, from a rep- were placed in front of the subjects ei-
resentational perspective, tasks that ther by diagrams or by physical objects.
look dramatically different may in fact This is the most acknowledged property
have a common structure. However, if of external representations. To many
we start our analysis with processes, we people, this is the only one.
may fail to capture this common struc- 2. External representations can
ture, because different representational provide information that can be directly
formats of the common structure can perceived and used without being in-
activate completely different processes. terpreted and formulated explicitly. For
The three aspects of distributed example, in the I1-E23 version of the
cognitive tasks are closely interrelated: TOH, Rules 2 and 3 were not told to the
the same formal structure can be im- subjects: they were built into the physi-
plemented by different isomorphic rep- cal constraints. They could be perceived
resentations, and different isomorphic and followed directly by the subjects.
representations can activate different When the subjects were asked to explic-
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
30
itly formulate the rules after the games, Related Approaches
few could do it. External representa- Although the mainstream approach to
tions seem to provide affordances cognition has focused on internal repre-
(Gibson, 1979). sentations, the role of the environment
3. External representations can an- in cognition has long been acknowl-
chor and structure cognitive behavior. edged by several alternative approaches.
The physical structures in external rep- For example, Gibson (1966, 1979) argued
resentations constrain the range of pos- that perception is the direct pickup of
sible cognitive behaviors in the sense environmental information
that some behaviors are allowed and (invariants) in the extended spatial and
others prohibited. For example, in the temporal patterns of optic arrays, and
I1-E23 version of the TOH, external that information in the environment is
Rules 2 and 3 could not be violated. sufficient for perception and action. The
They constructed an action space in sociohistorical approach to cognition
which only the actions that did not vio- (Leontiev, 1981; Luria, 1976; Vygotsgy,
late these two rules were permitted. 1978, 1986) argues that it is the continu-
This action space is the external prob- ous internalization of the information
lem space of the I1-E23 problem. and structure from the environment
4. External representations change and the externalization of internal rep-
the nature of a task. Norman (1991) resentations into the environment that
proposed that there are two different produce high level psychological func-
views of cognitive artifacts. From the tions.
system's view (internal + external rep- More recently, the role of the envi-
resentations), external representations ronment in cognition has become the
can make a task easier; from the per- central concern in several fields of cog-
son's view (internal representations nitive science. In the studies of the rela-
only), external representations change tionship between images and pictures, it
the nature of the task. For example, in has been shown that external represen-
the I123 version of the TOH, a subject tations can give us access to knowledge
had to process three internal rules, and skills that are unavailable from in-
while in the I1-E23 version the subject ternal representations (e.g., Chambers &
only had to process one internal rule. Reisberg, 1985; Reisberg, 1987). The sit-
Though the two versions had the same uated cognition approach argues that
abstract structure, their cognitive pro- the activities of individuals are situated
cesses were different. Nevertheless, in the social and physical contexts
when considered as systems, I1-E23 was around them and knowledge can be
much easier than I123. considered as a relation between the in-
5. External representations are an dividuals and the situation (e.g.,
indispensable part of the representa- Barwise & Perry, 1983; Greeno, 1989;
tional system of any distributed cogni- Lewis, 1991; Suchman, 1987). Studies
tive task. This property is a direct re- on diagrammatic reasoning have also
flection of the nature of distributed cog- focused on the functions of external
nitive tasks, which require the process- representations in cognition (e.g.,
ing of information distributed across in- Chandrasekaran & Narayanan, 1990;
ternal and external representations. Larkin, 1989; Larkin & Simon, 1987).
For example, Larkin & Simon (1987) ar-
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
31
gue that diagrammatic representations study of cognition. It has both theoreti-
support operators that can recognize cal and practical implications.
features easily and make inferences di- Theoretically, it can shed light on some
rectly. issues regarding the nature of cognition,
Although our current approach such as whether cognition is solely in
shares the same interest with others in the mind or distributed across the mind
the function of the environment in and the environment and whether
cognition, it differs in several aspects. people reason on formal structures or
First, our approach focuses on the rep- on content-specific representations.
resentational properties of distributed Practically, it can provide design princi-
cognitive tasks: how the information ples for effective representations.
needed for a distributed cognitive task is
represented across the internal mind
and the external environment. Second, REFERENCES
our approach demands the considera-
tion of the internal and external repre- Barwise, J. & Perry, J. (1983). Situations
sentations of a distributed cognitive task and attitudes. Cambridge, MA:
as a representational system. We argue The MIT Press.
that external representations are an in-
Chambers, D. & Reisberg, D. (1985). Can
dispensable part of any distributed cog-
mental images be ambiguous?
nitive task. Third, our approach de-
Journal of Experimental
mands the explicit decomposition of the
Psychology: Human Perception &
representational system of a distributed
Performance, 11, 317-328.
cognitive task into its internal and ex-
ternal components. With such a de-
Chandrasekaran, B. & Narayanan, N. H.
composition, we can identify the differ-
(1990). Towards a theory of com-
ent functions of internal and external
monsense visual reasoning. In K.
representations in cognition. Fourth,
V. Nori & C. E. V. Madhavan
we suggested that in order to under-
(Eds.): Lecture notes in computer
stand the nature of a distributed cogni-
science 472. Berlin, Germany:
tive task, we need to study the task's
Springer-Verlag.
formal structure, representation, and
processes and the interrelations among
Cheng, P. W. & Holyoak, K. J. (1985).
them. Finally, the principles of dis-
Pragmatic reasoning schemas.
tributed representations and the
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
methodology of representational analy-
sis developed in the present study have
Evans, J. S. B. T. (Ed.). (1983). Thinking
been applied to several real world prob-
and reasoning. London: Routledge
lems, including numeration systems,
& Kegan Paul.
relational information displays, and
cockpit instrument displays (Zhang, Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses consid-
1992). ered as perceptual systems. New
York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Conclusion
The distributed representations ap- Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological
proach offers a novel perspective for the Approach to Visual Perception.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
32
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. and other River-Crossing prob-
lems. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 412-
Greeno, J. G. (1974). Hobbits and Orcs: 440.
Acquisition of a sequential concept.
Cognitive Psychology, 6, 270-292. Kirlik, A. (1989). The organization of
perception and action in complex
Greeno, J. G. (1989). Situations, mental control skills. Unpublished PhD
models, and generative knowl- Dissertation. Columbus, OH: The
edge. In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky Ohio State University, Department
(Eds.), Complex information pro- of Industrial and Systems
cessing: The impact of Herbert A. Engineering.
Simon. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. Kotovsky, K. & Fallside, D. (1989).
Representation and transfer in
Griggs, R. A. & Newstead, S. E. (1982). problem solving. In D. Klahr & K.
The role of problem structure in a Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex informa-
deductive reasoning task. Journal tion processing: the impact of
of Experimental Psychology: Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
8 (4), 297-307.
Kotovsky, K. & Simon, H. A. (1990).
Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1977). What makes some problems really
Psychological differences among hard: explorations in the problem
problem isomorphs. In N. J. space of difficulty. Cognitive
Castellan, D. B. Pisoni, & G. R. Psychology, 22, 143-183.
Potts (Eds.), Cognitive theory.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H.
Associates. A. (1985). Why are some problems
hard? Evidence from Tower of
Hutchins, E. (1990). The technology of Hanoi. Cognitive Psychology, 17,
team navigation. In J. Galegher, R. 248-294.
E. Kraut, & C. Egido (Eds.),
Intellectual teamwork: Social and Larkin, J. (1989). Display-based problem
technical bases of collaborative solving. In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky
work. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence (Eds.), Complex Information
Erlbaum Associates. Processing: The Impact of Herbert
A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Hutchins, E. (in preparation). Erlbaum Associates.
Distributed Cognition: a cognitive
ethnography of ship navigation. Larkin, J. H. & Simon, H. A. (1987).
San Diego: University of Why a diagram is (sometimes)
California, Department of worth ten thousand words.
Cognitive Science. Cognitive Science , 11, 65-99.
Jeffries, R., Polson, P. G., Razran, L., & Leontiev, A. N. (1981). Problems in the
Atwood, M. E. (1977). A process development of mind. Moscow:
model for Missionaries-Cannibals Progress.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
33
make us smart. Reading, MA:
Lewis, C. M. (1991). Representational Addison-Wesley.
aiding. Unpublished manuscript.
Pittsburgh, PA: University of O'Brien, D. P., Noveck, I. A., Davidson,
Pittsburgh, Department of G. M., Fisch, S. M., Lea, R. B., &
Information Science. Freitag, J. (1990). Sources of diffi-
culty in deductive reasoning: The
Luria, A. R. (1976). Cognitive develop- THOG task. Quarterly Journal of
ment: its cultural and social foun- Experimental Psychology, 42A, 2,
dations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 329-351.
University Press.
Reisberg, D. (1987). External representa-
Margolis, H. (1987). Patterns, thinking tions and the advantages of exter-
and cognition: A theory of judg- nalizing one's thoughts.
ment. Chicago, IL: The University Proceedings of the Eighth Annual
of Chicago Press. Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ:
Mishkin, M., Ungerleider, L. G. and
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Macko, K. A. (1983). Object vision
and spatial vision: Two cortical Simon, H. A. (1981). The Sciences of the
pathways. Trends in Artificial (2nd ed.) . Cambridge,
Neuroscience, 6, 414-417. MA: The MIT Press.
Nickerson, R. (1988). Counting, comput- Simon, H. A. & Hayes, J. R. (1976). The
ing, and the representation of understanding process: Problem
numbers. Human Factors, 30, 181- isomorphs. Cognitive Psychology,
199. 8, 165-190.
Nissen, M. J. (1985). Accessing features Stevens, S. S. (1946). On the theory of
and objects: is location special? In scales of measurement. Science,
M. I. Posner & O. S. M. Martin 103 (2684), 677-680.
(Eds.), Attention and performance
XI. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Stevens, S. S. (1951). Mathematics, mea-
Erlbaum Associates. surement, and psychophysics. In S.
S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology Experimental Psychology. New
of everyday things. New York: York: Wiley.
Basic Books.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated
Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive arti- actions: The problem of human-
facts. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), machine communication. New
Designing interaction: Psychology York: Cambridge University Press.
at the human-computer interface.
New York: Cambridge University Thomas, J. C. (1974). An analysis of be-
Press. havior in the Hobbits-Orcs prob-
lem. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 257-
Norman, D. A. (in press). Things that 269.
Distributed Cognitive Tasks
34
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. (1980). A
feature-integration theory of atten-
tion. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-
136.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and lan-
guage. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M.
Foss (Ed.), New horizons in psy-
chology. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Wason, P. C. & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(1969). Proving a disjunctive rule.
Quarterly Journal of Psychology,
21, 14-20.
Wason, P. C. & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(1972). Psychology of reasoning:
Structure and content. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Zhang, J. (1992). Distributed representa-
tion: The interaction between in-
ternal and external information.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation.
San Diego: University of
California, Department of
Cognitive Science.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D. A. (1993). A
cognitive taxonomy of numeration
systems. Proceedings of the
Fifteenth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.